hello my son welcome to question number
four from Tom rocks master and I love
mathematics
thank you everyone for sending your
questions in and thanks as always for
voting the winning question this week is
what is the best way to win at the board
game Monopoly a great ballgame and also
a great question because who doesn't
want to win when they play Monopoly
there are many ways that you can think
about this question of how to improve
your chances of winning because monopoly
is a very strategic game and there's
lots of elements there's things to do
with money their strategies their
probabilities involving dice there's all
kinds of maps and all kinds of ways you
could think about this question what I'm
going to do keep it nice and simple and
just give you one really top tip in
order to maximize your chances of
winning next time you play and what I'm
going to do and then tell you which
color property you should buy if you're
really going to buy one full set of
properties or aim for one color property
that you're going to complete the set up
and we do want a complete set here
because once you earn all the properties
of one color of course then you can buy
houses and hotels and that's how you get
the big book so if you only buy one
color it probably makes sense to buy the
color of properties that is landed on
most often and this is where math can
help us Sonne Monopoly board you have 40
squared in total I've broken it down
here so you have 28 properties we have
three chunks where's three Community
Chest squares to taxpayers in compact
and luxury tax I believe and then
there's a four corner square so let's go
there's jail bears go to jail and
there's free parking so if it was
equally likely some land on any of the
forty square two and a half percent of
all turns would end up on any particular
square so you could just pick any square
that you wanted and say right two and a
half percent of all terms would land on
this square if it was the case that it
was equally likely to be on any square
on the board this is of course not the
case for many many
reason the main one being there are
trance cards and Community Chest cards
which will send you from what the square
you're on to a different square and
that's still within your turn and then
of course there's the go to jail square
which if you land on it you then go to
jail so the go to jail square may as
well be the jail square in a game of
Monopoly somewhere between four and six
percent of all terms will end up on the
square jail
so jail is the most visited square on a
Monopoly board doesn't really help us
yes because course you can't buy jail so
what we can do though is work out what
is the most likely square that you will
then move to once you've been in jail
and use that to our advantage in terms
of buying our property so what we need
to know is what is the most likely
number you will roll on a dice and then
count that many squares from jail and
use that to help us decide which color
property we should buy and I'm going to
do an experiment I'm going to roll lots
and lots of dice and I'm going to record
the numbers that I get so you can see
I'm going to do a third-person view of
the experiment you know I'm not teasing
so I decided I'm going to do three at a
time and then write them on the board so
it's a bit quicker
[Music]
that ladies and gentlemen was Matt in
action it wasn't too boring but what we
do have is this beautiful table useful
chart representing the results of 105
rolls of two dice now as you can see I
got a lot of seven eights 6 is also
quite popular but mainly 7/8 and sort of
dominating numbers here and that is what
we expect this is probability sort of
showing its head in real-life experiment
and the reason these numbers in the
middle are the most common it's because
they have the highest number of ways of
summing to that number with two dice so
let's start with the first number number
two so I didn't roll a single - the
reason for that is together - when
you're rolling two that you've got to
get a wall I'm type 1 and a 1 on data -
so that's only a 1 in 36 chance so
really I should have got three or so
total but again it's an experiment is
going to be errors and going to quite
work exactly
so to get a - you've 1 plus 1 so 1 plus
1 now to get a 3 you can get a 1 and a 2
or you could roll a 2 on dice 1 and a 1
under - so you need a 1 and a 2 but
there's two ways of doing that what
about 4 well we could have a 200 - we
could have a 103 or a 3 and a 1 and if I
continued like this following the same
pattern just thinking about how you can
make that number using two ducts
we should hopefully get a very similar
looking distribution very similar
looking shape as to what I got in the
real experiment in my
now I've completed the chart with all
the possible combinations rolling two
dice that you need to get the numbers
from 2 through to 12 and as you can see
they match really well and this is just
probability in action this is sort of a
real-life representation of what
probability means mathematically because
to get a seven for example there are 1 2
3 4 5 6 different ways to roll a 7 and
so all the different possibilities when
you roll two dice of those 36 different
combinations six of them will give you a
seven so 1/6 of the time you would
expect to get a 7 and then four six and
eight they both have five different
combinations and so five out of thirty
six rolls you were expecting a six or an
eight so there are next most popular
numbers and you can see this in our
distribution because it doesn't quite
match perfectly and that's because the
full probability here the more rolls you
do the more likely it is to match
perfectly so if I do a thousand rolls
instead of 105 it would look a lot
similar in shape now back to monopoly
beats the purpose of this demonstration
of our question if you remember we found
that jail is the squares and players
most likely to land on during their turn
and then we wanted to figure out what is
the most likely roll next time they get
to go and we actually found the micro
need to be 8 but if you look at the
general distribution it should be 7
according to probability but if you move
7 spaces from jail you actually land on
a Community Chest square so again
another square that we can't buy but the
next most likely roll of the dice are 6
& 8 they both have 5 possible ways of
making 6 & 8 with two dice we actually
saw in my experiment that 8 with the
most popular so it's a good bet and if
you're moving the 6 or 8 spaces from
jail you land on the orange properties
which is great so 6 spaces from jail is
an orange property
space is an orange property the third
and final orange property that you would
need to be able to buy those houses and
hotels get those big bucks is on stage
nine so it's nine spaces from jail and
again listing our results and the
expected result nine is also quite
likely to be wrong so next time you play
Monopoly buy those oranges all about the
audience properties buy all three get
the houses down get the hotels down
because people are most likely to land
on those squares and so if you own them
you're going to be the one taking their
money and you're going to hopefully
maximize your chance of winning the game
thanks everyone for watching hope you
enjoyed it please remember to subscribe
to my channel if you like what I'm doing
if you want more maths related fun check
out my website tom rocks mass comm you
can also follow me on facebook at tom
rocks maps same handle for twitter and
instagram and please do keep sending in
your questions and keep voting the next
pope will be up shortly thank you